---
title: 'CS 219: Network Verification - Course Review'
date: 2999-01-01
permalink: /posts/2999/01/cs-219/
tags:
  - network
---

TBD

Mathematical Prerequisites
======

Poset Topology
------

To understand a network we must have a language that describe sets of IP addresses.
Though every paper we read in 219 uses its own notation,
the idea behind is similar.
To have a unified notation for this post,
I use the concept of regular open algebra. (See also [1] Ch.10)

Suppose $P = (S, \leq)$ is a at most countable poset with a unique maximal $*$.
Intuitively, $S$ should be the set of *all prefixes* of IP addresses or NDN names.
We say $x$ *refines* or *extends* $y$ if $x\leq y$.
Define the topology $\tau$ as the topology generated by principal ideal
$\\{y: y\leq x\\}$ for all $x\in S$.
Then,

- A set is **open** if and only if it is downward closed.
  For example, the set of all prefixes starting with `192.168.*` or `10.0.*` is open,
  which includes `192.168.0.1`.
- A set is **closed** if and only if it is upward closed.
  For example, the set of all prefixes of `192.168.*` is closed,
  which includes `192.*`.
- For a set $A$, let $A^{\\perp}$ denote the closure of its complementary set,
  $A^{\\perp} = \\overline{S\\setminus A}$.
- An open set $A$ is called **regular** if $A^{\\perp\\perp} = A$.
  - If $A$ is open, $A^{\\perp\\perp}$ is the minimal regular set containing $A$.
  - For example, in a binary tree, the ideal generated by `0101*` and `0100*` is open but not regular.
    Include `010*` will make it regular.
    In plain English, a regular set cannot include all children of $x$ but exclude $x$ itself.
- The **meet** $\wedge$ of two *regular* open sets is their intersection $\cap$.
- The **join** $\vee$ of two *regular* open sets is the minimal regular open set containing them.
  $A\vee B = (A\cup B)^{\\perp\\perp}$.
  - For example, `0101*` meeting `0100*` gives `010*`.
- The **negation** $\neg$ of a *regular* open set $A$ is $\neg A = A^{\\perp}$.
- The boolean *true* and *false* are the whole set $S$ and the empty set $\varnothing$, resp.
- The topological space $(P, \tau)$ is countable T0, and complete.
- Note that $S$ is not necessarily being a tree.
  - For example, one can combine IP addresses and port numbers to make a space of packets.
    In this space, `(192.168.*, 8080)` refines both `(192.*, 8080)` and
    `(192.168.*, *)`, which are incomparable.
- For incomparable $x, y$, if there exists $z\leq x, y$, $x,y$ are called
  **compatible**.

Every open set $A$ is a union of principal ideals $\\{y: y\leq x\\}$ for some $x$.
Thus, we can use a minimal set of such $x$'s to represent $A$.
It is easy to write a program which computes meet, join and negation
using this principal representation.
Depending on $S$, there will be a canonical algorithm
and I don't think I need to describe the details.

This complete boolean algebra is sometimes called **boolean-valued logic**,
because it supports all operators of propositional logic.

Modal Logic
------

Modal logic includes modal operators to describe necessity $\Box$ and possibility $\Diamond$.
In modal logic, we can transite from one state to another,
and the truth values of propositions may change.
Under different contexts there are different definitions of modal operators.
Basically, $\Box P$ is true iff $P$ is true for *all* states that current state can transit to;
$\Diamond P$ is true iff $P$ is true for *some* future state.
One may define $\Diamond P$ := \neg\Box\neg P$.

[Kripke semantics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kripke_semantics)
gives a way to model the semantics of all different modal logic systems.
A **Kripke model** is a triple $\\langle W,R,\\Vdash \\rangle$.
$W$ is the set of possible states.
$R$ is a relation on $W$ that defines transition.
$\\Vdash$ is the forcing relation, where $w\Vdash P$ if the proposition $P$ is true at $w$.
Also, $w\\Vdash \Box P$ iff $u\\Vdash P$ for all $w R u$.

In Kripke model, modal axioms are related to the properties of $R$:

| Name | Axiom                                    | Condition                                                 |
|------|------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|
| K    | $\Box(A\to B)\to\Box A\to\Box B$         | -                                                         |
| T    | $\Box A\to A$                            | reflexive: $wRw$                                          |
| 4    | $\Box A\to \Box\Box A$                   | transitive: $wRv\wedge vRu\to wRu$                        |
| D    | $\Box A\to \Diamond A$                   | serial: $(\forall w)(\exists v)wRv$                       |
| H    | $\Box(\Box A\to B)\vee\Box(\Box B\to A)$ | $(wRu\wedge wRv)\to (vRu\vee uRv)$                        |
| G    | $\Diamond\Box A\to \Box\Diamond A$       | convergent: $(wRu\wedge wRv)\to \exists x(vRx\wedge uRx)$ |

Sometimes people uses $\bigcirc$ for holding at the next step,
and $\Diamond$ for eventually holding (i.e. the closure of $R$).

[Linear temporal logic (LTL)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linear_temporal_logic) is
a modal logic system frequently used in language design and networks.

Data Plane Verification
======

George looks at every method from different views: Zoe (ζωή, big picture) versus Bios (βίος, details).
In this post I won't put all Bia unless interesting.
Using those well-defined mathematical terms,
Zoai are quite easy to state and thus very short.

Header Space Analysis
------

A router can be abstracted as a transfer function that rewrites the packet and transfers it to the next hop.
A function that rewrites a packet will map a regular open set to another.
Therefore, we can simply track those sets.

- Compute reachability: Inject $*$ at a node A and then propagate.
- Finding loops: Let $T$ denote the function describing packets start from A, pass some nodes and come back to A.
  Check if the following descending chain is stationary at empty:
  
$$
[A_0 = *] \supseteq [A_1 = A_0\cap T(A_0)] \supseteq \cdots \supseteq [A_{i+1} = A_i\cap T(A_i)] \supseteq \cdots
$$

NetPlumber
------

If we keep necessary intermediate results, HSA can work incrementally.
Assume the graph from node A to B is a DAG.
We can push from the node that is modified.

This paper also presents a language that describes the graph.

Atomic Predicates
------

Regular open sets are generated by principal ideals via $\vee$.
Those ideals intersect with each other, and not everyone is useful in a network.
Compute a minimal set $M$ of principal ideals that can generates every regular open set used in HSA.
Encode every element of $M$ with a number,
and every regular open set with $\vee$ of elements from $M$.
The arithmetic is clear.

NoD
------

NoD utilizes SMT solver.
It adds new Select-Project operator and new ways of encoding.
But it seems that the new encoding only works for binary strings with finite length.

Instead of outputs all reachability relations, NoD checks beliefs specified by operators.
It can provide all violations.

Anteater
------

It reduces the problem to SAT. The same logic expression as boolean-valued logic can be used.

In implementation, it uses LLVM-IR.
So the user can write programs in C++, compiles it with clang to IR and then with Anteater to SAT.

Symmetries and Surgeries
------

This is designed for fat-trees of data center networks.
Since data center networks is symmetric, the network topology can be simplified.
For example, if A1 and A2 are connected to exactly the same boxes and configured with exactly same rules,
then they can be reduced to a single box A.
Even if boxes are not perfectly symmetric,
we can still reduce rules.
For example, use a regular open set to "cut" the network.

### Network logic

This work defines a modal logic similar to LTL, but specifically for network.
This is interesting so I give a breif introduction here with slightly modified notation.

In this work, a state is a packet $h$ staying at a specific interface $i$ of a node $n$,
denoted as $h@n.i$ or $h@p$ with $p=(n,i)$.
$h\Vdash P$ abbreviates $(\forall p)h@p\Vdash P$ (globally true for a packet)
and $\Vdash P$ abbreviates $(\forall h)h\Vdash P$ (tautology).

There are two kinds of transitions: internal and external.
An internal transition $h@n.i\to h'@n'.i'$ holds
iff $n$ rewrites $h$ to $h'$, and sends it to an interface connected to the next hop $n'.i'$.
An external transition $h@n.i\twoheadrightarrow h'@n.i'$ holds
iff $n$ rewrites $h$ to $h'$ and sends it to an external interface $i$.
(The paper writes $n'$ which I believe is a typo)

There are two kinds of atomic propositions:
$\alpha$ is a proposition describing $h$ and irrelevant to $p$: $h@p\Vdash \alpha$ iff $h\Vdash\alpha$.
$@p$ is a proposition holds for all packets at $p$: $h@p\Vdash @p$.
The three modal operators are applied to different relations:
$\Box$ and $\Diamond$ are applied to internal transitions,
but $\bigcirc$ is applied to external only.
That is

- $\Diamond P$ iff $P$ is currently true or true after the packet is forwarded to some internal port.
- $\Box P$ iff $P$ is currently true and always true in the internal network.
- $\bigcirc P$ iff the packet is going to be forwarded to an outgoing face, and $P$ is true there.

For example:

- $\Vdash \alpha\wedge @p \to \Box @p$ means packets satisfying $\alpha$ is dropped at $p$.
- $h \Vdash @p \to \Diamond(\neg @p \wedge\Diamond @p)$ means $h$ loops back to $p$,
  with header possibly rewritten.
- $\Vdash \alpha\wedge @p\to \Diamond(\neg @p \wedge\Diamond (\alpha\wedge@p))$ can detect infinite loops.

$\Vdash$ is specific for a network.
The paper proves for some specific $N, N', P$
$\Vdash_{N} P$ iff $\Vdash_{N'} P$.
Under this circumstance $N'$ can replace $N$.

Data Plane Testing
======

TBD

ATPG
------

Software
------

Control Plane
======

BGP-RCC
------

Batfish
------

ERA
------

Propane
------

Minesweeper
------

Lessons Summarized
======


References
======
- [1] Halmos, P. R., and S. Givant, 2009: Introduction to Boolean Algebras. Springer.