---
title: 'MATH 220BC: Mathematical Logic - Course Review'
date: 2021-01-01
permalink: /posts/2021/01/math-220bc/
tags:
  - logic
  - course review
---

This is a review and summary for course MATH 220BC, given by Professor Artem Chernikov and Andrew Marks.

In this post, I listed important theorems (in my mind) like a dictionary, so I can recall what I learnt when I read this in future.
Only the overview and summary may be useful to other people.

{% include toc %}

Overview
======

This is the first math course I took at UCLA.
Due to time schedule, I didn't take 220A, but I read though a online note and memorized important conclusions.
I could somehow catch up with B and C part.

220B is based on the textbook *A First Journey through Logic*.
The book is too brief, but the professor's lectures are clear.
This part is more related to computer science, as we discussed computability and Turing machines.
I heard that CS 181 covers something similar, but I think 220B is more on the math side.

220C is the most tough course I have ever took.
The professors made really great lectures, but the course material is very complex and counterintuitive.
(Well, maybe because I don't have *correct* intuitions)
I feel that this part is more related to analysis.

Basic Model Theory
======

[Model theory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Model_theory) works on formal theories and their models.
Most of the following results depend on infinite models.
For exmaple, compactness does not hold if we require every model to be finite.

First Order Logic
------

[First order logic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/First-order_logic) is obtained by augmenting propositional logic
with two quantifiers: the existential quantifier and the universal quantifier.
These quantifiers iterate over all possible values (the base set), but cannot refer to propositional formulas.
There are redundencies in logic connectors and quantifiers.
A minimal definition of a FOL *language* $\mathcal{L}$ will contain the following:

- Logical symbols (shared by all languages)
  - Equality relation: $=$
  - Connectives: $\neq$, $\wedge$
  - The existential quantifier: $\exists$
  - The variable set: $v_n$, $n\in\mathbb{N}$
- The *signature* of $\mathcal{L}$
  - A set of constant symbols, $\mathcal{C}$.
  - Sets of functions, $\mathcal{F}_n$ for $n$-ary functions.
  - Sets of relations, $\mathcal{R}_n$ for $n$-ary relations.

We can define *disjunction* $\vee$, *implication* $\rightarrow$, *equivalence* $\leftrightarrow$ and the *universal quantifier* $\forall$
based on these symbols.

We can define *terms* and *formulas* of this language:

- A *term* is something that can be interpreted as some value. It can be one of the following:
  - A variable.
  - A constant symbol.
  - A function call: $f(t_1,\ldots, t_n)$, where $f\in\mathcal{F}_n$ and $t_i$ is a term.
- An *atomic formula* is some elementary proposition:
  - $t_1 = t_2$, with $t_1,t_2$ terms.
  - $R(t_1, \ldots, t_n)$, where $r\in\mathcal{R}_n$ and $t_i$ is a term.
- A *formula* is a **finite** composition of atomic formulas:
  - $\phi$, where $\phi$ is an atomic formula.
  - $\neg\phi$, where $\phi$ is an atomic formula.
  - $\phi\wedge\chi$, where $\phi,\chi$ are atomic formulas.
  - $\exists x\phi$, where $\phi$ is an atomic formula and $x$ is a variable.
- We can define *free occurrence*, *bound occurrence*, *similtaneous substitution* just as we do in programming languages.
- A *sentence* is a formula with no free variables.

A language decides what formula we can write, but does not specify its meaning.
An interpretation of this language, is an $\mathcal{L}$-*structure* $\mathfrak{A}$:

- $\mathfrak{A}$ has a non-empty *base set* $A$.
- $\mathfrak{A}$ maps every constant to an element in $A$:
  $c^{\mathfrak{A}}\in A$ for all $c\in\mathcal{C}$.
- $\mathfrak{A}$ maps every $n$-ary function to a (well-defined) $n$-ary function on $A$:
  $f^{\mathfrak{A}}: A^n\to A$ for all $f\in\mathcal{F}_n$.
- $\mathfrak{A}$ maps every $n$-ary relation to a (well-defined) $n$-ary relation on $A$:
  $r^{\mathfrak{A}}\subseteq A^n$ for all $r\in\mathcal{R}_n$.

Then, we can define semantics:
- An *assignment* is a function $\alpha$ that maps variables to the base set.
- Given a term $t$, a model $\mathfrak{A}$ and an assignment $\alpha$,
  we can calculate the value of $t$, $t^{\mathfrak{A}}[\alpha ]$ be substitute the variables with assignments.
- Similarly, we can decide the truth value of a formula.
  Denote $\mathfrak{A}\models \phi[\alpha ]$ if its true.
- A formula is *universally valid*, i.e. tautology, if true in all structures.
  - Propositional tautologies, equality axioms and quantifier axioms are always universally valid.

Completeness and Soundness
------

An $\mathcal{L}$-*theory* $T$ is a set of $\mathcal{L}$-sentences.
Its elements are called axioms.
A $T$-*model* is an $\mathcal{L}$-structure where every axiom of $T$ is true.

Any sentence $\phi$ in a theory $T$ can be one of the **three** different cases:
- True in all $T$-models. Then, $\phi$ is called a $T$-*theorem*.
- False in all $T$-models. Equivalent to that $\neg\phi$ is a theorem.
- True in some models, but false in others. Then, $\phi$ is called $independent$ from $T$.

A *formal proof* is a **finite** sequence of sentences, where each sentence is obtianed by any of the following:
- An axiom of $T$.
- A predicate calculus tautology, an equality axiom, or a quantifier axiom
- Modus Ponens (MP) from two previous sentences.
- Universal generalization from a previous sentences. (From $\phi$ to $\forall x\phi$).

If a formal proof of $T$ ends in $\phi$, then $T$ proves $\phi$: $T\vdash \phi$.
A theory is *consistent* if it cannot prove $\phi\wedge\neg\phi$ for any $\phi$.
The following theorems show that a sentence has a formal proof iff it's true in all models.

**Soundness**: If $T\vdash\phi$, $\phi$ is true in all models.

[**Gödel's Completeness Theorem**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/G%C3%B6del%27s_completeness_theorem) or **Model existence theorem**:
Every consistent theory has a model. Hence, a sentence that is true in all models can always be proven.

This is proven by constructing a model for an arbitrary theory.
See also: [Henkin witness](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Witness_(mathematics)#Henkin_witnesses)

[**Craig’s Interpolation Theorem**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Craig_interpolation):
Let $\phi$ be a $\mathcal{L}_1$-sentence and $\psi$ be a $\mathcal{L}_1$-sentence.
Suppose $\models \phi\to\psi$.
Then, there exists a $\mathcal{L}_0 := \mathcal{L}_1\cap\mathcal{L}_2$ sentence $\rho$ s.t.
$\models\phi\to\rho$ and $\models\rho\to\psi$.

Compactness & Up and Down
------

[**Compactness Theorem**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compactness_theorem):
A theory is consistent if and only if every **finite** subset of it is consistent.

This is equivalent to the completeness theorem, as *every formal proof must be finite*.
On the other hand, we can also use [Łoś’s Theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ultraproduct#%C5%81o%C5%9B's_theorem)
to give a direct model.

- Two structures $\mathfrak{M}$ and $\mathfrak{N}$ are *elementarily equivalent* $\mathfrak{M}\equiv\mathfrak{N}$,
if they satisfy the same sentences.
- If for every formula $\phi(x_1,\ldots, x_n)$ and $\bar{a}\in M^n$,
$\mathfrak{M}\models\phi(\bar{a})$ iff $\mathfrak{N}\models\phi(\bar{a})$,
then $\mathfrak{M}$ is an *elementary substructure* (or *submodel*) of $\mathfrak{N}$: $\mathfrak{M}\prec\mathfrak{N}$.
- CLearly, elementary substructures are equivalent.
  But the reverse is not true, i.e. subset + elementary equivalent ≠ elementary substructure.
  - For example, $\mathfrak{M} = (\mathbb{N}_+, <)$ and $\mathfrak{N} = (\mathbb{N}, <)$ are isomorphic and equivalent,
  but $\mathfrak{M}$ is not a elementary substructure of $\mathfrak{N}$. Consider $\phi(y) := \exists x(x< y)$ and $y=1$.

[**Tarski-Vaught Test**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elementary_equivalence#Tarski%E2%80%93Vaught_test):
Suppose $\mathfrak{M}\subseteq \mathfrak{N}$. Consider formula $\phi(x_1,\ldots, x_n,y)$ and $\bar{a}=(a_1,\ldots,a_n)\in M^n$.
If whenever there exists some $u\in N$ satisfying $\phi(\bar{a},y)$ ($\mathfrak{N}\exists y\phi(\bar{a}, y)$),
there also exists some $v\in M$ satisfying $\phi(\bar{a},y)$ ($\mathfrak{M}\exists y\phi(\bar{a}, y)$),
then $\mathfrak{M}\prec\mathfrak{N}$.

**Downward [Löwenheim–Skolem theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/L%C3%B6wenheim%E2%80%93Skolem_theorem)**:
Let $\mathfrak{M}$ be a $\mathcal{L}$-structure and $A\subseteq M$.
Then, for any cardinal $\kappa$ s.t. $\max\\{\|\mathcal{L}\|,\|A\|\\}\leq \kappa\leq \|M\|$,
there is an elementary submodel of $\mathfrak{M}$ of size $\kappa$ containing $A$.   
Note: *every language is at least countable*.

*Proof sketch*: For every existence formula $\phi:=\exists y\psi(x_1,\ldots, x_n,y)$,
define Skolem function $f_{\phi}: M^n\to M$ as follows:
if there exists some $b$ s.t. $\psi(a_1,\ldots, a_n,b)$ is true, let $f_{\phi}(a_1,\ldots, a_n)$ be any $b$;
if there does not exists such $b$, let $f_{\phi}(a_1,\ldots, a_n)$ be any element.
Take a superset $S\subseteq S'$ s.t. $\|S'\| = \kappa$.
Take the closure of $S'$ under $f_{\phi}$ of all possible $\phi$ (at most $\|\mathcal{L}\|$ many).

**Upward Löwenheim–Skolem theorem**:
Let $\mathfrak{M}$ be a $\mathcal{L}$-structure.
Then, for any cardinal $\kappa$ s.t. $|M|\leq \kappa$,
there is an elementary extension of $\mathfrak{M}$ of size $\kappa$.

*Proof idea*: Use [diagram method](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elementary_diagram).


**[Omitting Types Theorem(型排除定理)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Type_(model_theory)#The_omitting_types_theorem)**:
- A **partial n-type** (in theory $T$) is a (usually infinite) set of $n$-variable formulas $\pi$ consistent with $T$.
  Formally, $T\cup\\{\exists \bar{v}\bigwedge_{\phi\in\pi_k} \phi\\}$ is consistent for all finite subset $\pi_k$.
- A model $\mathfrak{M}$ **realizes** $\pi$ if it is satisfiable in $\mathfrak{M}$;
  otherwise, $\mathfrak{M}$ **omits** $\pi$.
- $pi$ is **isolated** if there is a single formula $\phi$ that is equivalent to $\pi$,
  i.e. $T\vdash \exists\bar{v}(\phi\to\psi)$ for all $\psi\in\pi$.
- A **complete n-type** is a maximal partial n-type $\pi$. That is, for all $n$-formula $\phi(\bar{v})$,
  either $\phi(\bar{v})\in\pi$ or $\neg\phi(\bar{v})\in\pi$.

The theorem states that for a theory $T$ of a countable language and any countably many non-isolated partial types,
there exists a model of $T$ that omits all given types.

**[Saturated Model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saturated_model)**:
Suppose there is an $\mathcal{L}$-structure $\mathfrak{M}$.
- For $A\subseteq M$, an **partial n-type** (*of* $\mathfrak{M}$) **over** $A$ is 
  a set of $n$-formulas $\pi(\bar{x})$ in language $\mathcal{L}_A := \mathcal{L}\cup\\{c_a: a\in A\\}$,
  that is consistent with the theory of $\mathfrak{M}$.
  Formally, for all finite subset $\pi_k$, there is some $b\in M$ s.t. $\mathfrak{M}\models\pi_k(b)$.
- A **complete n-type over** $A$ is a maximal partial $n$-type over $A$.
- We define the term **realize**, **omit** and **isolate** similar to types of theories.
- $\mathfrak{M}$ is $\kappa$**-saturated** if for all $\|A\|\leq \kappa$, every 1-type over $A$ is realized.
- $\mathfrak{M}$ is **recursively saturated** if all recursively definable 1-type is realized.

**[Lindström's Theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lindstr%C3%B6m%27s_theorem)**:
FOL is the strongest logic satisfying both compactness and Downward Löwenheim–Skolem property.

Algebraic Closed Field
------

**[Quantifier elimination](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantifier_elimination)**:
A structure or a theory admits *quantifier elimination* if every formula is equivalent to a quantifier-free formula.
It is proven that if every formula in the form $\exists x\phi$ with $\phi$ quantifier free has a quantifier free form,
then the theory or structure admits quantifier elimination.


**[Algebraically closed field](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Algebraically_closed_field)**:
A field is *algebraically closed* if every non-constant polynomial has a root.

The theory of algebraically closed field, ACF, admits quantifier elimination.

**[Lefschetz principle](https://proofwiki.org/wiki/Lefschetz_Principle_(First-Order))**:
For a $\mathcal{L}_{ring}$-formula $\phi$, the following are equivalent:
- $\phi$ is true in some ACF of characteristic 0.
- $\phi$ is true in every ACF of characteristic 0.
- $\phi$ is true in ACFs of characteristic $p$ for arbitrarily large $p$. (i.e. for an infinite set of prime numbers)
- $\phi$ is true in ACFs of characteristic $p$ for sufficiently large $p$. (i.e. for all $p>N$)

**[Ax's theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ax%E2%80%93Grothendieck_theorem)**:
For all polynomial functions $f:\mathbb{C}^n\to\mathbb{C}^n$,
if $f$ is injective, then $f$ is also surjective.

Recursion Theory
======

[Recursion theory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computability_theory) studies computability and computable functions.

Primitive Recursive Functions
------

**Primitive recursive functions**:
A primitive recursive function is a $n$-ary function on natural numbers obtained by the following:
- Basic functions:
  - Successor $S := \lambda x. x+1$;
  - Constant zero $C^0_0 := \lambda. 0$;
  - Projection $P^n_j:=\lambda x_1\cdots x_n.x_j$
- Composition of p.r. functions:
  - $f := g(h_1,\ldots, h_n)$
- Recursion:
  - $f(x_1,\ldots, x_n, 0) := g(x_1,\ldots, x_n)$;
  - $f(x_1,\ldots, x_n, y+1) := h(x_1,\ldots, y, f(x_1,\ldots, x_n,y))$

A subset of $\mathbb{N}^n$ is p.r. iff its characteristic function is p.r.

One can prove that p.r. functions and sets are stable under:
- Boolean combinations ($\cap$, $\cup$, $\setminus$)
- Definition by cases
- Bounded sums and products
- Bounded $\mu$-operator: $f(\bar{x},z):=(\mu t\leq z)((\bar{x},t)\in X)$
  - $f(\bar{x},z)$ is the smallest natural number s.t. $(\bar{x},t)\in X$;
    0 if there does not exist.
- Bounded quantification.

We can also define the following functions:
- Combine $n$ numbers into one.
  - Functions $\alpha_n, \beta^n_i$ s.t. $\beta^n_i(\alpha_n(x_1,\ldots, x_n)) = x_i$.
- Finite sequences of natural numbers, [Gödel number](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/G%C3%B6del_numbering).
  - $\langle \cdot \rangle$ s.t. $\langle x_1,\ldots, x_n \rangle$ is a natural number
  - $\text{lg}(\langle x_1,\ldots, x_n \rangle) = n$
  - $(\langle x_1,\ldots, x_n \rangle)_i = x_i$

**[Ackermann function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ackermann_function)**:
$\xi:\mathbb{N}^2\to\mathbb{N}$ defined as follows:
- $\xi_0(x) = \xi(0, x) := 2^x$;
- $\xi_y(0) = \xi(y, 0) := 1$;
- $\xi_{y+1}(x+1) = \xi(y+1, x+1) := \xi(y, \xi(y+1, x))$.

This version is designed for the sake of proof, not the version that people generally use.
In this version, $\xi_0$ is exponentiation, $\xi_1$ is (basically) tetration, and $\xi_2$ is (basically) pentation.

The finite powers of Ackermann functions, $\xi^k_n = \xi_n\circ\cdots\circ\xi_n$ for $k$ times, give bounds
of p.r. functions.
- A function $f\in\mathcal{F}_1$ *dominates* $g\in\mathcal{F}_n$ if $g(\bar{x}) \leq f(\max(\bar{x},N))$ for some $N$.
- If $f$ is obtained by no more than $n$ times of recursions, then there exists some $k\in\mathbb{N}$ s.t.
  $\xi_n^k$ dominates $f$.

One can prove that all $\xi_n$ are p.r., but $\xi$ itself is not,
because $\xi^k_n$ cannot bound itself $\xi$.

More generally, we cannot define "computable functions" concept, say set $F$, with all of the following properties:
1. $F$ is countable: $F = \\{f_0, f_1,\ldots\\}$.
2. $F$ is closed under desired operations like recursion, composition, etc.
3. There is a "computer": $u\in F$, $u(n, \bar{x}) = f_n(\bar{x})$.
4. All functions on $F$ are total: $f_i$ terminates on all inputs.

This is because $\lambda n. u(n,n)+1$ does not equal to any $f_i$.
We cannot drop 2 and 3, and 1 is implied by 3.
Thus, to properly define the concept of "computability", we have to drop 4.

Partial Recursive Functions
------

A *partial function* from $\mathbb{N^n}\to\mathbb{N}$
is a function $f:A\to \mathbb{N}$ for some $A\subseteq\mathbb{N^n}$.
We use $f\in\mathcal{F}^\*\_n$ to denote the set of partial functions.
We say $f$ *converges* at $p$, $f(p)\downarrow$, for $p\in A$;
$f$ *diverges* at $p$, $f(p)\uparrow$, for $p\notin A$.

The set of *partial recursive functions* is the smallest set $E$ satisfying the following:
- $E$ contains the basic functions.
- $E$ is stable under composition (of partial functions).
- $E$ is stable under recursion (of partial functions).
- $E$ is stable under (unbounded) $\mu$-operator:
  $g(\bar{x}) := \mu y(f(\bar{x},y)=0)$ is defined as
  - $g(\bar{x}) = z$ if $z$ is the minimal element s.t. $f(\bar{x},z) = 0$ and $f(\bar{x},y)$ is defined
    for all $y\leq z$.
  - $g(\bar{x})\uparrow$ is not defined otherwise.

A total function is *(total) recursive* if it is a partial recursive function.

Recursive functions are computable functions.
([Church’s Thesis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Church%E2%80%93Turing_thesis))
Every intuitively computable function is recursive.

Universal Functions
------

**[Universal Functions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universal_function)**:
There exists $\varphi^p\in\mathcal{F}^\*\_{p+1}$ s.t.
every $f\in \mathcal{F}^\*\_{p}$ that is partial recursive equals to some $\varphi^p_i = \lambda \bar{x}.\varphi^p(i,\bar{x})$.
Moreover, $\varphi^p$ is partial recursive.

**[s-m-n Theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Smn_theorem)**:
For any natural numers $m$ and $n$, there exists a p.r. function $s^m_n\in\mathcal{F}_{n+1}$ s.t.

$$
\varphi^{n+m}_i(x_1,\ldots,x_n,y_1,\ldots,y_m) = \varphi^{m}_{s^m_n(i,x_1,\ldots,x_n)}(y_1,\ldots,y_m)
$$

In programming world, this is [partial application](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Partial_application),
or [currying](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Currying).


**[Kleene’s Fixed Point Theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kleene%27s_recursion_theorem)**:
For any total recursive function $\alpha\in\mathcal{F}\_1$ and $m > 0$, there exists $i\in\mathbb{N}$ s.t.
$\varphi^m_{i} = \varphi^m_{\alpha(i)}$.

**[Elimination of Recursion](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kleene%27s_recursion_theorem#Application_to_elimination_of_recursion)**:
The set of *total* recursive functions is the smallest set that
- Contains $S$, $C^0_0$, $P^n_i$;
- Contains $+$, $\cdot$, $1\_=$, $1\_<$;
- Is stable under composition;
- Is stable under total $\mu$-operator.
  - Total $\mu$-operator is the unbounded $\mu$-operator but only applicable when it always converges.

In other words, recurion is only used to define addition, multiplication and comparison.

Recursively Enumerable Sets
------

**[Recursively enumerable sets](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Recursively_enumerable_set)** have
many equivalent definitions. Suppose $S\subseteq\mathbb{N}^n$, then the following are equivalent:

- $S$ is either empty or the range of a total recursive function $f:\mathbb{N}\to\mathbb{N}^n$.
  - That is, there exists a recursive function that enumerates elements of $S$, but not necessarily in order.
- $S$ is either empty or the range of a p.r. function.
- $S$ is a projection of some recursive set $T\subset\mathbb{N}^{n+1}$.
- $S$ is a projection of some p.r. set $T\subset\mathbb{N}^{n+1}$.
- $S$ is the domain of a partial recursive function $f: \mathbb{N}^n\to\mathbb{N}$.

The set of r.e. sets is stable under intersection, union, projection,
bounded universal quantification, image (replacement) under recursive functions.

**Theorem of the Complement**: A set $X\subseteq\mathbb{N}^n$ is recursive
if and only if both $X$ and $\mathbb{N}^n\setminus X$ are r.e.

**the Halting Problem**: The domain of $\varphi^n$ is a r.e. set but not recursive.
The set of indices of Turing machines that halt on the empty input is r.e. but not recursive.

**[Rice's Theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rice%27s_theorem)**:
Suppose $\chi$ is a set of one-variable partial recursive functions that is non-empty nor full.
Then, the indices $I = \\{i: \varphi^1_i\in\chi\\}$ is not recursive.

**[Kolmogorov complexity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kolmogorov_complexity)**:
Given $n\in\mathbb{N}$, let $K(n)$ be the least $i\in\mathbb{N}$ s.t. $\varphi^1_i(0) = n$.
One can prove that there does not exist an infinite r.e. set $A\subseteq\mathbb{N}^2$ s.t.
$K(n)=i$ for all $(n,i)\in A$.

Models of Arithmetic
======

In this part, we study the models of natural numbers.
Since we can encode all programs into natural numbers,
we can bring them into FOL formulas and try to formally define "provability".

Decidability
------

If a language $\mathcal{L}$ has a finite signature,
then we can assign each symbol to a Gödel number, and encode every term, formula, and proof into a natural number.
- The set of codes of formulas and logical axioms of $\mathcal{L}$ are p.r. sets
- There exist p.r. functions that simulate substitution of terms and formulas.
- The set of formal proofs $\mathrm{Prf}=\\{(\\#\\#d, \\#\phi): d\text{ is a formal proof of }\phi\\}$
  is a p.r. set.
- The set of tautologies $U=\\{\\#\phi:\ \vdash\varphi\\}$ is r.e.

Given a $\mathcal{L}$-theory $T$,
- $T$ is *recursive* if the code of axioms of $T$ is recursive.
- $T$ is *recursively* (or *effectively*) *axiomatizable* if there exists a recursive theory $T'$ that
  has the same theorem of $T$.
- $T$ is *decidable* if the set of codes of theorems $\\#\mathrm{Thm}(T)$ of $T$ is recursive.
- If $T$ is recursive, then the formal proofs of $T$, $\mathrm{Prf}(T)$, is recursive.
- $T$ is effectively axiomatizable iff $\\#\mathrm{Thm}(T)$ is r.e.
- If $T$ is effectively axiomatizable and complete, then $T$ is decidable.
- If $T$ is decidable, then the theory of $T$ plus a finite set of axioms is also decidable.

Peano Arithmetic
------

We work in the language of arithmetic $\mathcal{L}_{ar} = \\{0,S,+,\cdot, < \\}$.
In this language, we can express any (standard) natural number $n\in\mathbb{N}$ as $\underline{n}$:
- $\underline{0} \equiv 0$;
- $\underline{n+1} \equiv S(\underline{n})$.

The **weak Peano axioms** is the finite theory $\mathrm{PA}_0$ consisting of the following 8 axioms:
1. $0$ has no predecessor.
  - (A1) $\forall x \neg Sx=0$
2. Every non-zero number has a predecessor.
  - (A2) $\forall x\exists y(\neg x=0\to Sy=x)$
3. Two numbers with equal successors are equal.
  - (A3) $\forall x\forall y(Sx=Sy\to x=y)$
4. $0$ is the identity of addition.
  - (A4) $\forall x\ x+0 = 0$
5. Successor commutes with addition.
  - (A5) $\forall x\forall y\ x+Sy =S(x+y)$
6. $0$ is the zero of multiplication.
  - (A6) $\forall x\ x\cdot 0 = 0$
7. Multiplication is distributive over successor.
  - (A7) $\forall x\forall y\ x\cdot Sy =x\cdot y + x$
8. "Less" means "subtractable".
  - (A8) $\forall x\forall y(x< y\leftrightarrow \neq x=y\wedge (\exists z\ x+z=y))$

The **[Peano axioms](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peano_axioms)** is the infinite theory PA,
consisting of $\mathrm{PA}_0$ and the *axiom (schema) of induction*.


- There exists a model of $\mathrm{PA}_0$ that both addition and multiplication are neither commutative nor associative,
and $<$ is not a total order.
- The standard natural number $\mathbb{N}$ is isomorphic to an initial segment of any $\mathrm{PA}_0$ model.
- In a model of PA:
  - Addition and multiplication are commutative and associative.
  - Multiplication is distributive w.r.t. addition.
  - $<$ is a total order.

**[Arithmetical Hierarchy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arithmetical_hierarchy)**:
Every FOL formula $\phi$ can be classified into the following hierarchy:
- $\phi$ is $\Sigma_0 = \Pi_0 = \Delta_0$ if is is equivalent to a formula with only *bounded* quantifiers;
- $\phi$ is $\Sigma_{n+1}$, if it is equivalent to a formula in the form $\exists x_1\cdots\exists x_m\psi$,
  where $\psi$ is $\Pi_{n}$;
- $\phi$ is $\Pi_{n+1}$, if it is equivalent to a formula in the form $\forall x_1\cdots\forall x_m\psi$,
  where $\psi$ is $\Sigma_{n}$;
- $\phi$ is $\Delta_{n}$ if it is both $\Sigma_{n}$ and $\Pi_{n}$.
- Sometimes people write $\Sigma^0_n$, $\Pi^0_n$ and $\Delta^0_n$.
  The superscript $0$ means counting *number quantifiers* instead of *function quantifiers*.

Any $\Sigma_1$ sentence satisfied in $\mathbb{N}$ is a theorem of $\mathrm{PA}_0$.

$$
\mathbb{N}\models\phi[m_1,\ldots, m_n] \Rightarrow \mathrm{PA}_0\models\phi(\underline{m_1},\ldots, \underline{m_n})
$$

**Representability Theorem**: Every total recursive function is represented by a $\Sigma_1$ formula.
A set is r.e. iff there is a $\Sigma_1$ formula defining it in $\mathbb{N}$.
Here, $\phi$ "represent" $f$ means:

$$
\mathrm{PA}_0\models \forall y\left[ \phi(\underline{n_1},\ldots,\underline{n_p},y)
\leftrightarrow y = \underline{f(n_1,\ldots, n_p)}
\right]
$$


**[Overspill](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Overspill)**:
Let $\mathfrak{M}$ be a *non-standard* model of PA and $\phi(x)$ a formula.
If for all $n\in\mathbb{N}$, $\mathfrak{M}\models\phi(\underline{n})$,
then there exists $c\in M$ non-standard s.t. $\mathfrak{M}\models\phi(c)$.

**[Pigeonhole Principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pigeonhole_principle)**:
For any PA model $\mathfrak{M}$, $\mathcal{L}_{ar}(M)$-formula $\theta(v,z)$ and $a\in M$:

$$
\mathfrak{M}\models \left[ \forall x(\exists z>x)(\exists v< a)\theta(v,z) \right] \to
(\exists v< a)\forall x(\exists z>x)\theta(v,z)
$$

In other words, if a predicate maps infinite many numbers ($z> x$) into a finite number of elements ($v< a$),
then there exists a fixed number ($v$) that is the image of infinitely many numbers.

**MacDowell-Specker Theorem**: Any countable model of PA has an elementary end extension.

First Incompleteness Theorem
------

**The Diagonal Argument**:
For every formula $\phi(v)$, there exists a sentence $\Delta_{\phi}$ s.t.
$\phi(\underline{\\#\Delta_{\phi}})$ is equivalent to $\neg\Delta_{\phi}$ in $\mathrm{PA}_0$.

**[Fixed Point Theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diagonal_lemma)**:
For all $\phi(v)$, there exists a sentence $\psi$ s.t.

$$
\mathrm{PA}_0\vdash \phi(\underline{\#\psi})\leftrightarrow\psi
$$

*Proof*: Take $\psi :\equiv \Delta_{\neg\phi}$.

**[Tarski’s Theorem on the Non-definability of Truth](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tarski%27s_undefinability_theorem)**:
In any model $\mathfrak{M}$ of $\mathrm{PA}_0$,
there does not exist a formula $S(v)$ s.t. $\mathfrak{M}\models\phi$ iff $\mathfrak{M}\models S(\underline{\\#\phi})$.

*Corollary*: The theorems of $\mathbb{N}$ are undecidable.

**[Church's Theorem](https://mathworld.wolfram.com/ChurchsTheorem.html)**:
Any consistent theory containing $\mathrm{PA}_0$ is undecidable.

*Corollary 1*: The tautologies of the finite language $\mathcal{L}_{ar}$ is undecidable.

*Corollary 2*: The tautologies of a language that consists only one binary relation is undecidable.

*Corollary 3*: The tautologies of a language that consists of a unary predicate and a constant is decidable.

**[Gödel’s First Incompleteness Theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/G%C3%B6del%27s_incompleteness_theorems#First_incompleteness_theorem)**:
Any consistent and recursive theory containing $\mathrm{PA}_0$ is incomplete.

**[Rosser's Variant](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rosser%27s_trick)**:
Rosser writes down an independent sentence that witnesses this theorem.
Let $T\supseteq \mathrm{PA}_0$ be consistent and recursive.
Let $P_T(x,y)$ represents the set of formal proofs of $T$, i.e. $y$ proves $x$.
Let $\nu(x, y)$ represents the negation of formula, i.e. $y$ is $\neg x$.
Set:

$$
P^R_T(x,y) :\equiv P_T(x,y)\wedge\neg(\exists z\leq y)\exists u(P_T(u,z)\wedge \nu(x,u))
$$

That means,
- for standard numbers $x$ and $y$, $y$ proves $x$;
- for non-standard numbers $y$, there does not exist a proof $z$ for the negation of $x$.
Then, $\Delta_T^R :\equiv \Delta_{\exists y P^R_T(x,y)}$ is independent.

*Remark*: If we directly use $P^T$ as $\Delta_T :\equiv \Delta_{\exists y P_T(x,y)}$,
then $T$ cannot prove $\Delta_T$, but $T$ may prove $\neg\Delta_T$.
$P_T(\\#\Delta_T, y)$ does not imply $T\vdash \Delta_T$ when $y$ is non-standard,
so no contradiction.

Second Incompleteness Theorem
------

Though general satisfiability is undecidable, if we limit the complexity of formula,
we can get decidable results.
For example, satisfiability of $\Sigma_1$ formulas.

**Provably Total $\Sigma_1$ Functions**: 
Suppose $\chi_f$ represents $f$.
If PA proves that for any (even non-standard) numbers $x_1,\ldots, x_n$,
there is exactly one $y$ that satisfies $\chi_f$,
then $f$ is *provably total* $\Sigma_1$.
Formally,

$$
\text{PA}\vdash \forall x_1,\ldots,x_n\exists !y\ \chi_f(x_1,\ldots, x_n,y)
$$

- Every p.r. function is provably total $\Sigma_1$
- Not every recursive function is provably total $\Sigma_1$ (though representable).
  - There is a universal provably total $\Sigma_1$ function $g\in\mathcal{F}_3$, in the sense that:
    for every provably total $\Sigma_1$ function $f$
    there exists $a,b\in\mathbb{N}$ s.t. $f = \lambda n.g(a,b,n)$.

**Definability of Satisfiability for $\Sigma_1$ Formulas**:
There exists a $\Sigma_1$-formula $\mathrm{Sat}(v)$ s.t.

$$
\mathrm{PA}\vdash \phi\leftrightarrow \mathrm{Sat}(\underline{\#\phi})
$$

The proof uses [certificate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Certificate_(complexity)) method.

**Definition of Provability**:
For a recursive theory $T$, there exists an operator $\Box_T$ on sentences s.t.
- If $\phi$ is a $\Sigma_1$-sentence, $\text{PA}\vdash \phi\to\Box_T\phi$;
- For any sentence $\psi$, $\mathbb{N}\models \Box_T\psi \iff T\vdash \psi$.

**[Löb's Axioms](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/L%C3%B6b%27s_theorem)**:
for any sentence $\phi,\psi$,
1. $T\vdash \phi \Rightarrow T\vdash \Box_T\phi$;
2. $T\vdash [\Box_T\phi\wedge \Box_T(\phi\to\psi)]\to \Box_T\psi$;
3. $T\vdash \Box_T\phi\to\Box_T\Box_T\phi$.

*Corollaries*:
- If $T\vdash \phi\to\psi$, then $T\vdash \Box_T\phi\to\Box_T\psi$;
- $T\vdash \Box_T(\Box_T\phi\to\phi)\to\Box_T\phi$;
- If $T\vdash \Box_T\phi\to\phi$, then $T\vdash \Box_T\phi$;
- If $T\vdash \neg\Box_T\phi$, then $T\vdash \Box_T\phi$.

**[Gödel’s Second Incompleteness Theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/G%C3%B6del%27s_incompleteness_theorems#Second_incompleteness_theorem)**:
Let $T$ be a computable theory. Then, it is impossible to prove $\Box_T\phi$ for any $\phi$ in $T$.
More specifically, let $\text{Con}_T$ denote the consistency of $T$: $\text{Con}_T :\equiv \neg\Box_T(0=1)$.
Then, $T$ cannot prove $\text{Con}_T$.

**[Tenenbaum’s Theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tennenbaum%27s_theorem)**:
There is no recursive non-standard model of PA.
That is, for any countable non-standard model of PA,
there is no way to code the elements of the model as (standard) natural numbers
such that either the addition or multiplication operation of the model is a computable on the codes.  
SA: [Non-standard model of arithmetic](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Non-standard_model_of_arithmetic#Structure_of_countable_non-standard_models)


Set Theory
======

Axiomatic set theory studies models of set theory.
Since the whole world of logic is built upon set theory,
we cannot find a structure like $\mathbb{N}$ and define it as a "standard model".
However, assuming the consistency of the theory,
there are models developed based on the universe that we are in.

Cumulative Hierarchy
------

**Language of Set Theory**: $\mathcal{L}\_{set} = \\{\in \\}$.
Other symbols can be developed as abbreviations of $\mathcal{L}\_{set}$-formulas.

**[The Axiom Schema of Comprehension](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Axiom_schema_of_specification)**:
The only axiom for *naive* set theory,
is that every logic formula $\phi$ has a set corresponding to it:

$$
\forall\bar{w}\exists y\forall z\ (z\in y\leftrightarrow \phi(z, \bar{w}))
$$

**[Cantor's Diagonal Argument](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cantor%27s_diagonal_argument)**:
For all set $X$, there is no surjection $f: X\to\mathcal{P}(X)$.

**[Russel's Paradox](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/russell-paradox/)**:
Let $D = \\{x: x\notin x\\}$. Then, $D$ is not a set.
This proves that the axiom schema of comprehension is inconsistent.

**[The Axioms of ZF](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zermelo%E2%80%93Fraenkel_set_theory)**:
To avoid the inconsistency, the construction of sets must be limited.
Basic axioms of axiomatic set theory include the following.
Models of set theory generally satisfy all or a major part of them:

- **The axiom of Extensionality**: Every set is determined by its members.
  - $\forall x\forall y[x=y \leftrightarrow \forall z(z\in x = z\in y)]$.
- **The axiom of Foundation**: Every non-empty set contains a $\in$-minimal element.
  - Let $x\neq \varnothing$ abbreviate $\exists y(x\in x)$.
  - $\forall x[x\neq\varnothing \to \exists y\in x\forall z\in x(z\notin y)]$
- **The axiom of Pairing**: Given two sets, there is a set containing exactly them.
  - $\forall x\forall y\exists w[x\in w\wedge y\in w\wedge \forall z(z\in w\to z=x\vee z=y)]$.
  - We can let $\\{x,y\\}$ denote this set; use $\\{x\\}$ denote $\\{x,x\\}$.
  - We can define ordered pair $(x,y) = \\{x, \\{x, y\\}\\}$.
- **The axiom of Union**:
  Given any set of sets $x$, there is set containing exactly all the element of these sets.
  - Let $y=\bigcup x$ denote $\forall z[z\in y\leftrightarrow \exists w\in x(y\in w)]$.
  - $\forall x\exists y[y = \bigcup x]$.
- **The axiom of Nullset**: There is a set with no elements.
  - $\exists x[x = \varnothing]$
- **The axiom of Infinity**: There exists an **inductive** set.
  - $\exists x[\varnothing\in x\wedge\forall y(y\in x\to y\cup\\{y\\}\in x) ]$.
- **The axiom of Powerset**: For every set x, there is a set containing all the subsets of this set.
  - Let $y\subseteq x$ abbreviate $\forall z(z\in x\to z\in y)$.
  - Let $y=\mathcal{P}(x)$ abbreviate $\forall z(z\in y\leftrightarrow z\subseteq x)$.
  - $\forall x\exists y[ y=\mathcal{P}(x)]$
- **The axiom schema of Separation**: Every definable subset of a set exists.
  - $\forall x,\bar{w}\exists y\forall z[z\in y\leftrightarrow z\in x\wedge\phi(z, \bar{w})]$
  - The collection of a formula is a **class** $Y = \\{z: \phi(z,\bar{w})\\}$.
  - Let $z\in Y$ abbreviate $\phi(z,\bar{w})$.
  - Note that a *proper* class $Y$ "does not exist": $\neg \exists y\forall x[x\in y\leftrightarrow x\in Y]$.
  - We can define cartesian products, relations and functions with this axiom schema.
- **The axiom schema of Collection**:
  If $x$ is a set, and $\phi$ defines a class from each element of $x$, then there is a set which meets all these classes.
  - $\forall x,\bar{v}\exists y\forall z\in x[ \exists w\phi(w,z,\bar{v})\to \exists w\in y\phi(w,z,\bar{v})]$.
- **The axiom schema of Replacement**:
  The image of a set under a definable class function is a set.
  - $\forall x,\bar{w}[((\forall a\in x)(\exists! y)\phi(a,y,\bar{w}))\to \exists z
    \forall y(y\in z\leftrightarrow (\exists a\in x)\phi(a,y,\bar{w}))  ]$.
  - This is equivalent to Seperation + Collection in ZF-(Sep+Col).

**[Axiom of Choice (AC)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Axiom_of_choice)**:
  Every set of pairwise disjoint nonempty sets has a “choice set”.

AC has many equivalent theorems.
AC also has some pathological results.
However, without a choice axiom, one cannot prove a countble union of countble set is countble.
People developed ZF+[DC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Axiom_of_dependent_choice)+[AD](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Axiom_of_determinacy)
for set theory models that AC is not satisfied. AD is incompatible with AC.

**[Wellordering](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Well-order)**:
- A **strict partial order** is a irreflecive and transitive binary relation.
- A strict partial order is **linear** if any two elements are comparable.
- A strict partial order is **wellfounded** if every subset contains a minimal element.
- A **wellordering** is linear wellfounded strict partial order.
- *Theorem*: Given two wellorderings, either they two are isomorphic,
  or one is isomorphic to an initial segment of the other. Furthermore, the isomorphism is unique.

**[Ordinals](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ordinal_number)**:
- A set $x$ is **transitive** if forall $a\in x$, $b\in a$ implies $b\in x$.
  - Note: $\in$ is not necessarily a transitive relation on $x$.
    For exmaple, $\\{\varnothing, \\{\varnothing\\}, \\{\\{\varnothing\\}\\}\\}$.
- An **ordinal** is a transitive set $\alpha$ s.t. $\in$ on $\alpha$ is a wellordering.
- Let $\text{ORD}$ denote the class of ordinals.
- Define $\alpha < \beta$ iff $\alpha \in \beta$.
  Then, $<$ is a wellordering on $\text{ORD}$.
- Any wellordered set $P$ is isomorphic to a unique ordinal, called the **order type** of $P$.
- Let $\alpha+1 = \alpha\cup\\{\alpha\\}$.
  - If $\alpha = \beta+1$, $\alpha$ is a **successor ordinal**;
  - Otherwise, $\alpha$ is a **limit ordinal**.
- Let $\omega$ be the intersection of all inductive sets.
  Then, $\omega$ is the least non-zero limit ordinal.
  The elements of $\omega$ are **natural numbers**.
  Let $0 := \varnothing$.

**[Transfinite Induction](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transfinite_induction)**:
- A class $C$ is equal to ORD if it satisfies the following:
  - $0\in C$;
  - For all $\alpha$, $\alpha\in C\to \alpha+1\to C$;
  - If $\lambda$ is a (non-zero) limit ordinal, $(\forall\alpha<\lambda) \alpha\in C\to\lambda\in C$.
- Let $G$ be a class function. Then, there is a unique class function $F$ s.t. for all $\alpha\in\text{ORD}$,
  $F(\alpha) = G(F\restriction\alpha)$.
  - *Note*: Generally, people prove uniqueness first, and then existence.
- We can define ordinal addition, multiplication and exponentiation by recursion.

**[Cantor normal form](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ordinal_arithmetic#Cantor_normal_form)**:
For any ordinal $\alpha$, there *uniquely* exist natural numbers $n,k\_0,\ldots, k\_{n-1}$ and
ordinals $\alpha \geq \beta\_0 > \cdots > \beta\_{n-1}$ s.t.

$$
\alpha = \omega^{\beta_0}\cdot k_0 + \cdots + \omega^{\beta_{n-1}}\cdot k_{n-1}
$$

*Note*: It's possible that $\alpha = \omega^{\alpha}$.

**[The cumulative hierarchy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Von_Neumann_universe)**:
- For each ordinal $\alpha$, define set $V\_{\alpha}$ as:
  - $V\_0 = \varnothing$;
  - $V\_{\alpha+1} = \mathcal{P}(V\_{\alpha})$, for any $\alpha$;
  - $V\_{\lambda} = \bigcup\_{\beta<\lambda}V\_{\beta}$, for $\lambda$ a limit ordinal.
- Let the class $V$ be the union of all $V\_{\alpha}$.
- For $x\in V$, define its **rank** to be *the least ordinal* $\alpha$ that $x\in V\_{\alpha}$.
  - One can verify that $\mathrm{rank}(x) = \sup\\{\mathrm{rank}(y)+1: y\in x\\}$
- The **transitive closure** of $x$ is defined as the smallest transtive set containing $x$,
  - For any $x$, let $x\_0 = x$ and $x\_{n+1} = x\_n\cup\bigcup x\_n$.
    Then, the transitive closure is $\mathrm{TC}(x)=\bigcup\_{n< \omega} x\_n$.
- Assume $\text{ZF}^-$ (ZF minus Foundation), then the axiom of foundation is equivalent to $\forall x(x\in V)$.
  - *Note*: $x\in V$ is actually the shorthand for $\exists \alpha[\alpha\in\mathrm{ORD} \wedge x\in V\_{\alpha}]$.

**[Mostowski Collapse](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mostowski_collapse_lemma)**:
If a relation $R$ on a class $X$ is *wellfounded*, *setlike* and *extensional*, then
there exists a unique transitive class $Y$ and a unique isomorphism $(X,R)\cong (Y,\in)$.
- **wellfounded**: For every non-empty subset of $X$, there exists an $R$-minimal element.
- **setlike**: $R^{-1}(x)$ is always a set;
- **extensional**: $R^{-1}(x) = R^{-1}(y)$ iff $x=y$.

Cardinal Arithmetic
------

**Equivalence of AC**:
- **[Zorn's lemma](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zorn%27s_lemma)**: Given a strict partial order,
  if every chain has an upper bound, then there is a maximal element.
- **[Hausdorff Maximality principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hausdorff_maximal_principle)**:
  Every partial ordered set has a maximal chain.
- **[Zermelo’s wellordering theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Well-ordering_theorem)** or $\mathrm{AC}^+$:
  Every set can be  well-ordered.
  - *Note*: Whether there exists a *computable* well-ordering of $\mathbb{R}$ is independent of ZFC.
- The cardinalities of any pair of sets are comparable.
- For all infinite sets $X,Y$, $\|X\|+\|Y\| = \|X\|\times \|Y\|$.

AC also implies the **partition principle**: If there is a surjection from $X$ to $Y$,
then there is an injection from $Y$ to $X$.
But whether this principle implies AC is still open.

**[Cantor-Shröder-Bernstein theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Schr%C3%B6der%E2%80%93Bernstein_theorem)**:
- Define $\|X\| = \|Y\|$ if there is a bijection.
- Define $\|X\| \leq \|Y\|$ if there is an injection from $X$ to $Y$.
- (ZF) If $\|X\| \leq \|Y\|$ and $\|Y\| \leq \|X\|$, then $\|X\| = \|Y\|$.

**[Cardinal](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cardinal_number)**:
- An ordinal $\alpha$ is a cardinal if for all $\beta<\alpha$, $\|\beta\| < \|\alpha\|$.
- Let $\omega\_{\alpha}$ denote the $\alpha$-th infinite cardinal; let $\aleph\_{\alpha}$ denote its cardinality.
- Let $\kappa^+$ denote the least cardinal of cardinality greater than $\kappa$.
- $\aleph\_{\alpha} + \aleph\_{\beta} = \aleph\_{\alpha} \cdot \aleph\_{\beta} = \max\\{\aleph\_{\alpha}, \aleph\_{\beta}\\}$.

**[Hartogs's theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hartogs_number)**:
- (ZF) For any set $X$, there is an ordinal that cannot be injected into $X$.
- This ordinal is called **Hartog’s number** $h(X)$.


**[Cofinality](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cofinal_(mathematics))**:

Infinitary Combinatorics
------

Constructible Hierarchy
------

Forcing
------

Summary
======

References
======

- A First Journey through Logic
- Set Theory Notes
  - There are some typos, but none of them will affect the understanding.
- Turing Computability
- Math220 ABC Notes
